[RUMBLING]
[AUDIO LOGO]
[ETHEREAL MUSIC]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It has been said that
sacred geometry is the language
of the universe, the building
blocks with which the infinite
intelligence constructs
everything in creation,
from the micro to the macro.
Crystals as perfected
geometric forms
are a prime example of
the underlying blueprint
of balance, symmetry, and order.
Does the geometry, the
structure, and shape
of a crystal give
us clues in terms
of what its metaphysical
properties are?
Can the ways in which crystals
are formed by the Earth
tell us what they
are best used for?
Is there, for example, a
best shape for processing
grief or attracting love
or manifesting abundance?
And is there an
ultimate perfect form
to optimize a crystal's
energetic functions?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Scientists believe today
that Earth is approximately 4.5
billion years old.
The first crystals began to
form only 100 million years
after Earth is believed
to have originated,
at 4.4 billion years.
So we know that
because the oldest
crystal that's been found now is
a zircon crystal in Australia.
And it is believed to have
formed only 100 million years
after the beginning of the
planet that we live on.
When we talk about these
crystals and the immense age,
there are so many different
ways that they can form,
and there are many
different classifications.
There are 32 crystal classes
that are acknowledged
in the scientific literature.
And those classes are
made from crystal systems.
And there are seven.
>> These seven are based
on the actual lattice types
of structures.
So the lattice structure
is the specific geometry
that the atoms or molecules
will arrange themselves around.
And this type of
geometry then determines
the family, or the sort of
group, of crystal types.
For example, one of them
is called triclinic,
such as kyanite and turquoise.
There's one that's
called monoclinic.
So, for example,
malachite and moonstone
are monoclinic crystals.
Another is orthorhombic,
such as topaz and sulfur.
There's rhombohedral.
Or sometimes, rhombohedral
is also called trigonal.
And so like calcite and ruby
and sapphire are rhombohedral.
And the hexagonal
crystals are, for example,
quartz, all the quartz crystals.
And emerald is another
example of a hexagonal.
And sometimes they even
form with six sides
because of that hexagonal
lattice structure.
And then the final one is
cubic, or sometimes they
call it isometric.
So for example, pyrite is cubic.
And diamond is a
particular type of cubic.
>> So each of these seven
crystal classes has many
subclasses that are used.
And it becomes very complex in
terms of how the crystals are
defined-- the number of
faces, the number of angles,
the symmetry, the internal
symmetry within the crystals
themselves--
all following very precise laws
from a field of energy that we
cannot see.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What's interesting about
these forms is that they
correspond to the elements.
Now, the cube, which is
the first of those forms,
represents the Earth.
The octahedron, that
represents the wind.
The icosahedron, that
represents the water.
We have the tetrahedron
that represents fire.
And we have the dodecahedron
that represents sacred sound.
By visualizing these forms
and encoding information
and intention into them, we
can create specific effects
and amplify specific intentions.
This demonstrates
very clearly how
the geometrically organized
structure of the crystals
is what is holding information
and that it's the information
that we send forth that
produces the healing.
>> Each of these geometries
has a particular meaning,
a particular energy of
creation that they anchor.
And to look at it as
sacred is to recognize
that these energies are
coming from a divine mind
all the way down into this
physical manifestation.
And we're recognizing that form
as being sacred in its origin.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The geometric shapes that
make up crystal structures can
be related to the five-element
system of Chinese medicine.
The amorphous stones,
which have no structure,
can be associated with the
fluidity of water represented
by the circle.
The shape of the wood
element is a hexagram
and associated with the
hexagonal crystal structure.
Fire is represented
by the triangle.
The trigonal, triclinic,
and orthorhombic structures
all have the triangle
as part of their shape.
The square can be associated
with the boundaries
we have on Earth.
It is found in the
cubic crystal structure.
Metal is represented
by the rectangle.
It has similar
boundaries as the square,
but its height and width give
it a relationship to balance.
The tetragonal
crystal structure is
associated with the rectangle.
Each of these shapes relates
to a particular temperamental
nature.
And crystal structure can
have a profound effect
on how we relate to the world.
If our temperament
works for us-- that is,
if we're happy with
how we live life--
great.
If not, choosing stones
based on crystal structures
can help us make
deep lasting change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Crystals form in
many different ways.
Some of them, for example,
form in the rivers.
You have some that form in
the bellies of the mountains,
where there's a lot
of pressure that
comes down from the mountain
above it and around it.
You might have heat
coming in from the deeper
layers of the Earth.
And this combination
of pressure and heat
compacts the crystals together.
And diamonds are formed
that way, for example.
You have, in caves,
you have the dripping
of the water that comes
down from above in the cave.
And it creates stalactites and
then, below, the stalagmites.
There's many ways that
the crystals can grow.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Crystals and stones are
formed at different levels
of the Earth, which I call
the level of formation.
The level of
formation of a stone
is important because it gives
us a clue about its best use.
Generally, sedimentary stones
are best for acute conditions
affecting the surface
energetics of the body.
Sedimentary stones are
usually relatively soft,
so they have a quick effect,
which we need for acute issues.
Metamorphic stones are formed
by the interaction of minerals
that might not ordinarily meet.
Change brings them together
to form a new stone.
They help us deal with our
interactions with the world.
Igneous stones,
emanating originally
from the core of
the Earth, resonate
with our deepest issues--
who we are as individuals.
They can help us
either challenge
those parts of ourselves
that cause us difficulty
or help us drive them more
deeply into the anatomy,
in which case they
are held latent
until we have the
strength to confront them
in this life or the next.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Many precious gems take
hundreds of millions of years
to form within the Earth.
I believe the
consciousness of the Earth,
as well as the influence
of other planets
in the solar system, can be
imparted into these gems.
There's a growing market
for lab-made gemstones,
with many people insisting they
work for astrology and healing.
But I'm not so sure you can
take this incredibly long,
drawn-out process, with the
energy and participation
of planet Earth being a
critical component of it,
speed it up in a lab, take
the Earth's consciousness
completely out of the equation,
and still get healing benefits
from these synthetic gems.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Beyond the level at which
a stone was formed, igneous,
metamorphic, or sedimentary,
knowing how and where a stone
was formed is important to have
a better understanding of how
to use it.
Obsidian is a good example.
At some point in the
very distant past,
when the Earth was going through
one of its tumultuous periods
of change, superheated
magma started building up
under the crust of the Earth.
More and more, the heat and
the pressure intensified.
And then a point of weakness
in the crust began to give way,
and all that magma was
finally able to move
from deep within the Earth
up through the crust.
And finally, still
intensely hot and pushed
by tremendous pressure, it
burst up and out into the air.
Suddenly, the very hot
material was subjected
to a very cold temperature.
It was shocked by the cold.
It changed from molten,
liquefied, silica-rich material
to glass.
So what does this
tell us about its use?
Obsidian retains the energetic
history of what happened to it
and communicates that
story to the body.
It helps bring warmth
from deep inside the body
toward the surface.
Because the stone was subjected
to such radical change,
it understands shock.
When someone is
acutely traumatized,
their energy is in
a state of stasis.
It's like they're frozen.
Holding obsidian will help
move and warm their energy
so that it can begin
to circulate again.
The stone has other uses,
as well, but almost all
are somehow related
to bringing energy
to the surface of the body,
which ultimately helps
our immune system protect us.
Obsidian is useful
for acute conditions
and for short periods
of application.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Crystals come in all shapes,
sizes, and price ranges.
But no matter what
the shape or size,
all will possess the
specific healing properties.
From the humble
tumbled pocket stones
to crystallized
specimens, raw stones
to carved and embellished
crystal forms,
there is something for everyone.
For crystal healers and
placement on the body,
cabochons are practical,
as they don't roll off
the body so easily.
Following the doctrine
of signatures,
we can receive clues about
which organ, system, or chakra
a mineral may be
effective for by observing
their unique structure,
color ray, and shape.
For example, if you look at
this botryoidal malachite,
how does it make you feel?
It feels like it's bubbling out,
and the bullseye pattern design
brings us into the
depths of its center.
In crystal healing, malachite
is an emotional purger stone.
The copper element
increases conductivity
as it penetrates and
excavates deep emotions buried
within the emotional body.
>> The structure of a crystal
is a very important factor when
making a choice, especially
if the stone is relatively
transparent.
With transparency, light
from the outside world
mingles with light
from our own bodies,
both bouncing around the inside
of the stone's lattice work.
The influence of the crystal
structure on the light
can change us, and
we need to know how.
For example, there
came a time when
I was working on the
book "Stone Medicine"
that I was feeling
urgency to get it
to a certain state
of completion.
I needed very strong boundaries
to get the work done.
I chose to wear garnet pendant
and earrings during that time.
Garnet has a cubic
crystal structure,
which supports boundaries.
My boundaries got
so strong, I started
being a little bit
rude to people.
Eventually, I started feeling
like I was being squeezed.
But by that time, I was pretty
much done with the work.
It was a huge relief
to take off the garnet.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What's most important
for gems that truly work
for astrological purposes
is they must be natural
and untreated, which
is very hard to find.
99.9% of sapphires on
the commercial market
are heat treated.
Heat treatment renders
gems useless for astrology.
It brings a gemstone
practically to its melting point
and alters its
chemical structure
to make it appear higher
quality or a more vivid color.
This type of treatment
changes the fundamental nature
of the stone, destroying
its metaphysical essence.
Astrological gemstones
must also be free of flaws.
In the crystal
worlds, many times,
inclusions are part of the
personality of the crystal.
But in the astrological
gemstone world,
flaws can distort and prohibit
the flow of light and color
frequency from being
transmitted properly.
Cracks will stop the
gem from working,
as will black inclusions
that don't allow
light to flow through properly.
Faceting precious gemstones
allows them to reflect and play
with light in a way that
the rough material does not.
A cut gemstone almost
acts like a laser
or acts the way a ray of
sun does when concentrated
through a magnifying glass.
Light comes through
the top of the gem
and funnels down through
the point of the stone,
producing an increasingly
concentrated beam of color.
This is how the
properties of the gemstone
are transmitted to the wearer.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The five-element system gives
a model for understanding how
crystal structure can help
us deal with life issues such
as grief or
attracting a partner.
Grief is the emotion
associated with metal
and the organs of the
lungs and large intestine.
Grief comes when we are
mourning someone or thing that
had great value in our lives.
It is an opportunity
to honor that person
by recognizing how important
they were in one's life.
It's only a problem if
we get stuck in the grief
and can't move on.
Using five-element
thinking, we can
try to control the grief
by using something that
stimulates fire to melt metal.
In stone medicine, the trigonal,
triclinic, and orthorhombic
structures are all
associated with fire.
Any of the quartz crystals,
with their trigonal structure,
could be used in this case.
Amethyst is known for helping us
deal with the sadness of life.
Another possibility is sunstone.
It has a triclinic structure
and has a very young nature
to push us out into the light.
Another shape of quartz crystal
is the self-healed crystal.
Usually, the end of
a crystal shows where
it broke off from its matrix.
In the case of the
self-healed crystal,
the broken end
manages to heal itself
with many small
new terminations.
This crystal teaches us that
it is indeed possible to heal,
even when we feel broken.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Any quartz with a single
termination is a masculine
crystal.
And when it has two
connected points,
it's a feminine crystal.
This is a single generator, a
body with six sides terminating
into a clear point.
This is the base,
where the crystal was
connected to the Earth matrix.
Single generators are
excellent programming crystals
to place on the altar.
The crystal will project
and amplify your prayers
into the universe.
It is important to only
work with good thoughts,
as the crystal will
magnify your intentions
and will return the
energy back to you.
Double-terminated
crystals like this one
have two termination
points on opposite ends,
and energy can move
through them rapidly.
On a crystal healing
layout on the body,
they are ideal for
placing in between chakras
when you would like to connect,
bridge, and move energy.
Double-terminated crystals have
balanced polarity, teaching us
how to maintain balance.
They're also practical tools
for developing telepathy.
Clusters are many single
generators living together,
sharing a common base.
They create a strong
energetic field as light
bounces off of each other,
reflecting a lot of light
into the room wherever they are.
They act as a negative ionizer
and can be placed in a room
to clear the energetic
aftermath of an argument or just
bringing in more light
and joy into a room.
Crystal clusters teach us how to
live harmoniously in community.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So in modern times, one
of the pioneers in opening
the door to our
relationship with crystals
and the technological age was
from a brilliant innovator.
His name was Marcel Vogel.
He was an IBM scientist.
When he began to
understand the properties
of crystalline
substances and what
they mean in terms of
electrical information, in terms
of electromagnetic
information, and, specifically,
in terms of light.
He was fascinated by
the way that light
would move through very
specific quartz crystals.
And he began to optimize
those, eventually building
his own crystals, growing his
own, cutting his own crystals,
and what is now called
the Vogel quartz crystal.
It is a double-terminated quartz
crystal, a point on both ends.
And he began using these
not only in technology,
as we understand
it today, but he
began to relate the idea
of the quartz crystal
as a transducer of energy
to facilitate healing
in the human body, mirroring
what many of our most
ancient and cherished
spiritual traditions
have always alluded to and have
continued to practice today.
Now the science is
catching up with why
this might be effective
and how it can be even more
effective in our lives today.
>> Marcel Vogel was a scientist.
He got lots of
patents for his work.
And he realized that
the crystals, not only
do they have these amazing
properties of conductance
and piezoelectric and
whatnot, but he also
realized that the
internal lattice
structure of the crystals was
according to the tree of life.
And he then realized that
they will store energy
within that crystal structure.
He wanted to find a
way to harness what
he called ether physics
and directing that
through the crystals.
He cut different numbers--
so he brought in numerology--
and the facets, or the
sides, of the crystal
would have different numbers.
So sometimes it's 16 sides.
Sometimes it's 22 sides.
Vogel believed
that it was drawing
in the pure energy from the
ether, or that original source,
and then responding, as well, to
the intention that we give it,
to the energy that we put
in with our own vibration.
And then it took all of that
and amplified that power
to send it out with
both the sacred geometry
and the numerology involved.
>> A Vogel crystal is a
superior instrument of healing.
It is a quartz
crystal precisely cut
into a double-terminated,
dipyramidal, geometric form,
the female end cut precisely
to the same 51 degrees
as the slope of the
Great Pyramid of Giza.
This form was
inspired by a vision
Marcel received of the tree
of life from the Kabbalah.
Marcel believed that
love was the glue which
held the universe together and
that our primary responsibility
was to love.
At his psychic research
lab, he discovered
that thought is
connected to energy
and that the inhaling
and exhaling of breath
is connected to the receiving
and transmitting of thought.
He further discovered that
human thought projects
most powerfully with
a pulse of breath,
like in a yoga Fire Breath.
[EXHALES SHARPLY]
That is what
started his research
with the therapeutic application
of crystals in synergy
with human consciousness
for healing,
as well as for structuring
crystallized water.
Refashioning the crystal
into this proper shape
transformed the crystal
into a quantum converter
that would extend the
thought and intention
of the user for healing.
Marcel believed that when these
crystals were used with love,
it made the energy
of the mind coherent
and amplified the
healing resonance.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Just as with everything
that exists, how we are made,
where we are made, and what we
are made of impacts all of who
and what we are.
Our personalities
and purpose are
born from all these
factors combined.
Crystals are no different.
Their molecular structure,
the shapes they grow in,
the shapes they're cut
in, and the materials
they're made of absolutely
inform and define what
they can help you with.
Most importantly, though,
heed Marcel Vogel's advice.
Use crystals to their
highest potential
by infusing them with the
most important ingredient,
the frequency of love.
[MUSIC PLAYING]